SOFTWARE  ENGINEERING  AND  PROJECT  MANAGEMENT (BCS501)  
 
 
1  
 MODULE  –1 
CHAPTER  1 --INTRODUCTION  
Software  and Software  Engineering  
 
Software  Engineering is the product  of two words,  software,  and engineering.  
 
Software is more than just a program code. A program is an executable code, which serves some 
computational  purpose. Software  is considered to be  a collection of  executable  programming code, 
associated libraries and documentations. Software, when made for a specific requirement is called a 
software product.  
 
Engineering on the other hand, is all about developing products, using well -defined, scientific 
principles and methods.  
Software Engineering is an engineering branch associated with development of software product 
using well -defined scientific principles, methods and procedures. The outcome of software 
engineering is an efficient and reliable software product.  
Definitions  
 
IEEE  defines  software  engineering  as: 
 
(1) The application  of a systematic,  disciplined,  quantifiable  approach  to the development, 
operation and maintenance of software; that is, the application of engineering to software.  
 
(2) The study of approaches as in  the above  statement.  
 
Fritz Bauer, a German computer scientist, defines software engineering as: Software engineering 
is the establishment and use of sound engineering principles in order to obtain economically software 
that is reliable and work efficiently on  real machines.  
 
1.1 The Nature  of software  
Software  takes  on a dual role. It is a Product  and at the same  time a Vehicle  (Process)  for 
delivering a product.  
 
As a Product, it produces, manages, modifies, acquires and displays the information –It is an 
information transformer that can be a single bit or a complex multimedia presentation delivered 
from data acquired from dozens of independent sources.  
 
As a Vehicle  (Process),  delivers the  product.  Software acts  as the  basis for: 
 Control  of other  computer(Operating  Systems)  
SOFTWARE  ENGINEERING  AND  PROJECT  MANAGEMENT (BCS501)  
 
 
2  
  Communication  of Information(Networks)  
 Creation  and control  of other  programs(Software Tools  and Environment)  
 
Software  delivers  the most  important  product  of our time called information.  It transforms  personal 
data (Individual financial transactions), It manages business information, It provides gateway to 
worldwide  information networks (Internet) and provides  the means for acquiring information in all 
of its forms.  
 
1.1.1 Software  
 
Defining  Software  : Software  is defined as 
 
1. Instructions  : Programs  that when  executed  provide  desired  function,  features,  and 
performance.  
2. Data  structures:  Enable  the programs  to adequately  manipulate  information.  
3. Documents: Descriptive information in both hard copy and virtual forms that describes the 
operation and use of the programs.  
Characteristics  of software  
 
Software  has characteristics  that are considerably different  than those  of hardware:  
 
1) Software  is developed  or engineered;  it is not manufactured  in the Classical  Sense.  
 
 Although some similarities exist between software development and hardware 
manufacturing, the two activities are fundamentally different.
 In both activities, high quality is achieved through good design, but the manufacturing phase  
for hardware  can introduce quality  problems that are nonexistent  or easily  corrected for 
software.
 Both the activities are dependent on people, but the  relationship between people is totally 
varying. These two activities require the construction of a "product" but the approaches are 
different.
 Software costs are concentrated in engineering which means that software projects cannot 
be managed as if they w ere manufacturing. 
 
2) Software  doesn’t  “Wear  Out”  
 In early  stage  of hardware  development  process  the failure  rate is very high due to 
manufacturing defects, but after correcting defects failure rate gets reduced. 
 Hardware  components  suffer  from  the growing  effects  of many  other  environmental 
factors. Stated simply, the hardware begins to wear out. 
 Software  is not susceptible  to the environmental  maladies  (extreme  temperature,  dusts  and 
vibrations) that cause hardware to wear out [Fig:1.1] 
The following  figure  shows the  relationship  between failure  rate and time.  
SOFTWARE  ENGINEERING  AND  PROJECT  MANAGEMENT (BCS501)  
 
 
3  
  
 
 
 
 
 When a hardware component wears out, it is replaced by a spare part. There are no software 
spare parts. 
 Every software failure  indicates an error in design or in the  process through which the design 
was translated into machine -executable code. Therefore, the software maintenance  tasks that 
accommodat e requests for change involve considerably more complexity than hardware 
maintenance. However, the implication is clear —the software doesn’t wear out. But it does 
deteriorate (frequent changes in requirement) [Fig:1.2]. 
 
 
 A software  part should be  planned and carried out with the  goal that it tends to be  reused in 
various projects (algorithms and data structures). 
 Today software industry is trying to make library of reusable components E.g. Software GUI  
is built using  the reusable  components  such as message  windows,  pull down  menu  and many 
more such components. 
 In the hardware  world,  component  reuse  is a natural  part of the engineering process.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3) Most  Software  is custom -built rather  than  being  assembled  from  components:  
SOFTWARE  ENGINEERING  AND  PROJECT  MANAGEMENT (BCS501)  
 
 
4  
 1.1.2 Software  Application  Domains  
Nowadays, seven broad categories of computer software present continuing challenges for software 
engineers:  
 
1. System  Software:  
 A collection of programs written to service other programs. Some system software 
(e.g., compilers, editors, and file management utilities). Other system applications 
(e.g. Operating system components, drivers, networking software, telecommunication 
processors) process largely indeterminate data.  
  In both cases there is heavy interaction with computer hardware, heavy usage by 
multiple users, scheduling and resource sharing.  
2. Application  Software:  
 Stand -alone  programs  that solve  a specific  business  need.  [Help  users  to perform 
specific tasks].  
 Application  software  is used to control  business  functions  in real time  (e.g.,  point -of- 
sale transaction processing, real -time manufacturing process control).  
3. Engineering/Scientific  Software:  
 It has been characterized by “number crunching” algorithms. (Complex numeric 
computations).  
 Applications range from astronomy to volcanology, from automotive stress analysis 
to space shuttle orbital dynamics, and from molecular biology to automated 
manufacturing. Computer -aided design, system simulation, and other interactive 
applications have begun to take a real -time and even system software characteristic.  
4. Embedded  Software:  
 It resides within a product or system and is used to implement and control features 
and functions for the end user and for the system itself.  
 Embedded  software  can perform  limited  and esoteric  functions  (e.g.,  keypad  control 
for a microwave oven) or provide significant function and control capability (e.g., 
digital functions in an automobile such as fuel control dashboard displays, and 
braking systems).  
5. Product -line Software:  
 Designed  to provide  a specific  capability  for use by many different  customers.  
 Product -line software can focus on a limited and esoteric marketplace (e.g., 
inventory control products) or address mass consumer markets (e.g., word 
processing, spreadsheets, computer graphics, multimedia, entertainment, database 
management, and personal and business financial applications).  
6. Web  Applications : 
 It is a client -server  computer  program  that the client  runs on the web browser.  
SOFTWARE  ENGINEERING  AND  PROJECT  MANAGEMENT (BCS501)  
 
 
5  
  These applications are called “WebApps,” this network -centric software category 
spans a wide array of applications. In their simplest form, WebApps  can be little 
more than a set of linked hypertext files that present information using text and 
limited graphics.  
 
7. Artificial  Intelligence  Software:  
 These  makes  use of non-numerical  algorithms  to solve  complex  problems. 
Knowledge based expert systems.  
 Applications within this area include robotics, expert systems, pattern recognition 
(image and voice), artificial neural networks, theorem proving, and game playing.  
New Software  Challenges:  
 Open -world computing: Creating software to allow machines of all sizes to communicate 
with each other across vast networks (Distributed computing —wireless networks).  
 
 Net sourcing : Architecting simple and sophisticated applications that benefit targeted end - 
user markets worldwide (the Web as a computing engine).  
 
 Open Source: Distributing source code for computing applications so customers can make 
local modifications easily and reliably ( “free” source code open to the computing 
community).  
 
1.1.3 Legacy  Software  
 
 Legacy  software  is older  programs  that are developed  decades  ago. 
 The quality of legacy software is poor because it has inextensible design, convoluted 
code, poor and nonexistent documentation, test cases and results that are not 
achieved.  
 
As time  passes legacy systems evolve  due to following reasons:  
 
  The software must be adapted to meet the needs of new computing environment  
or technology.  
 The software  must be  enhanced to implement  new business requirements.  
 
  The software  must  be extended  to make  it interoperable  with more  modern 
systems or database.  
 
  The software  must  be re-architected  to make  it viable  within  a network  
environment.  
SOFTWARE  ENGINEERING  AND  PROJECT  MANAGEMENT (BCS501)  
 
 
6  
 1.2 Unique  Nature  of Web  Apps  
In the early days of the World Wide Web (1990 -95), websites consisted of little more than a set of 
linked hypertext files (HTML) that presented information using text and limited graphics . As 
time passed, the augmentation of HTML  by development tools (e.g. , XML, Java) enabled Web 
engineers to provide computing capability along with informational content . 
 
Web-based systems and applications (WebApps) were born. Today, WebApps have evolved into 
sophisticated computing tools that not only provide stand -alone f unction to the end user, but also 
have been integrated with corporate databases and business applications.  
 
WebApps are one of a number of distinct software categories. Web -based systems and 
applications “involve a mixture between print publishing and soft ware development, between 
marketing and computing, between internal communications and external relations, and between art 
and technology.”  
 
The following attributes  are encountered  in the  vast majority of  WebApps.  
 
 Network intensiveness . A WebApp  resides on a network and must serve the needs of a 
diverse community of clients. The network may enable worldwide access and 
communication (i.e., the Internet) or more limited access and communication (e.g., a 
corporate Intranet).  
 Concurrency . A large num ber of users may access the WebApp at one time. In many cases, 
the patterns of usage among end users will vary greatly.  
 
 Unpredictable load. The number of users of the WebApp may vary by orders of magnitude 
from day to day. One hundred users may show up on  Monday; 10,000 may use the system 
on Thursday.  
 
 Performance . WebApp  should  work  effectively  in terms  of processing  speed.  If a WebApp  
user must wait too long (for access, for server -side processing, for client -side formatting and 
display), he or she may decide to go elsewhere.  
 Availability . Although expectation of 100 percent availability is un reasonable, users of 
popular WebApps often  demand access on a 24/7/365 basis  . 
 
 Data  driven . The primary  function  of many  WebApps  is to use  hypermedia  to present text, 
graphics, audio, and video content to the end user. In addition, WebApps  are commonly used 
to access information that exists on databases that are not an integral part of the Web - based 
environment (e.g., e -commerce or financial applications).  
 
 Content sensitive. The quality and aesthetic nature of content remains an important  
determinant of the quality of a WebApp.  
SOFTWARE  ENGINEERING  AND  PROJECT  MANAGEMENT (BCS501)  
 
 
7  
  Continuous evolution . Unlike conventional application software that evolves over a series 
of planned, chronologically spaced releases, Web applications evolve contin uously.  
  Immediacy . Although immediacy —the compelling need to get software to market 
quickly —is a characteristic of many application domains, WebApps often exhibit a time - to-
market that can be a matter of a few days or weeks.  
 
 Security . Because WebApps ar e available via network access, it is difficult, if not 
impossible, to  limit  the population of end users who may access the application. In order to 
protect sensitive content and provide secure modes  
 
 Aesthetics . An undeniable part of the appeal of a WebApp is its look and feel. When an 
application has been designed to market or sell products or ideas, aesthetics may have as 
much to do with success as technical design.  
 
1.3 Software  Engineering  -A Layered  Technology  
In order  to build  software  that is ready  to meet  the challenges  of the 21st century,  you 
must recognize a few simple realities.  
 
 Problems  should be  understood  before  a software  solution  is developed.  
 
 Design  is a pivotal  Software  Engineering  activity.  
 
 Software  should  exhibit  high quality.  
 
 Software  should be  maintainable  
 
These  simple  realities  lead to one conclusion.  Software  in all of its forms  and across  all of its 
application domains should be engineered . 
 
Software  Engineering:  
Fritz  Bauer  defined  as: 
 
Software  engineering  is the establishment  and use of sound  engineering  principles  in order  to 
obtain software that is reliable and works efficiently on real machines in economical manner.  
 
IEEE has developed  a more  comprehensive  definition  as: 
 
1) Software engineering is the application  of a systematic, disciplined, quantifiable  approach to  
the development, operation, and maintenance of software.  
 
2) The study  approaches  as in (1) 
SOFTWARE  ENGINEERING  AND  PROJECT  MANAGEMENT (BCS501)  
 
 
8  
 Software Engineering is a layered technology. Software Engineering encompasses a Process , 
Methods for managing and engineering software and tools . 
 
Software engineering is a fully layered technology, to develop software we need to go from one 
layer to another. All the layers are connected and each lay er demands the fulfillment of the previous 
layer. [Fig:1.3]  
 
 
Software  engineering  is a layered  technology.  Referring  to above  Figure,  any engineering 
approach must rest on an organizational commitment to quality.  
 
 The bedrock that supports software  engineering is a  quality focus.  
 
 The foundation for software engineering is the process layer. The software engineering 
process  is the glue that holds  the technology  layers  together  and enables  rational  and timely 
development of computer software. Process defines a framework that must be established 
for effective delivery of software engineering technology.  
 
 Software engineering methods provide the technical how-to’s for building software. 
Methods encompass a broad array of tasks that include communication,  requirements 
analysis,   design   modeling,   program   construction,   testing,   and  support.  
 Software  engineering tools  provide  automated  or semi -automated  support  for the process 
and the methods. When tools are integrated so that information created by one  tool can be 
used by another, a system for the support of software development, called computer -aided 
software engineering is established.  
 
1.4 THE  SOFTWARE  PROCESS  
A process is a collection of activities , actions , and tasks that are performed when some  
work p roduct is to be created.  
SOFTWARE  ENGINEERING  AND  PROJECT  MANAGEMENT (BCS501)  
 
 
9  
 An activity strives to achieve a broad objective (e.g. communication with stakeholders)  and 
is applied regardless of the application domain, size of the project, complexity of the effort, or degree 
of rigor with which software engineering is to be applied.  
 
An action encompasses a set of tasks that produce a major work product (e.g., an 
architectural design model).  
 
A task focuses on a small, but well -defined objective (e.g., conducting a unit test) that 
produces a tangible outcome.  
 
A process framework establishes the foundation for a complete software engineering process by 
identifying a small number of framework activities that are applicable to all software projects, 
regard less of their size or complexity. In addition, the process framework encompasses a set of 
umbrella activities that are applicable across the entire software process.  
 
A generic  process framework  for software engineering  encompasses  five activities:  
 Communi cation . Before any technical work can commence, it is critically important to 
communicate and collaborate with the customer. The intent is to ‘understand stakeholders’ 
objectives for the project and to gather requirements that help define software features  and 
functions.  
 Planning . A software project is a complicated journey, and the planning activity creates a 
“map” that helps guide the team as it makes the journey. The map —called a software project 
plan —defines the software engineering work by describing t he technical tasks to be  
conducted,  the risks  that are likely,  the resources  that will be required,  the work  products to 
be produced, and a work schedule.  
 
 Modeling . Creation of models to help developers and customers understand the requirements 
and software design.  
 
 Construction . This activity combines code generation and the testing that is required to 
uncover errors in the code.  
 
 Deployment . The software is delivered to the customer who evaluates the delivered product 
and provides feedback based on  the evaluation.  
 
These  five generic  framework  activities  can be used during  the development  of small,  simple 
programs, the creation of large Web applications, and for the engineering of large, complex 
computer -based systems.  
 
Software engineering process framework activities are complemented by a  number  of Umbrella 
Activities . In general, umbrella activities are applied throughout a software project and help a 
software team manage and control progress, quality, change, and risk . 
SOFTWARE  ENGINEERING  AND  PROJECT  MANAGEMENT (BCS501)  
 
 
10  
 Typical  umbrella  activities  include:  
 Software project tracking and control —allows the software team to assess progress  against 
the project plan and take any necessary action to maintain the schedule.  
  Risk management —assesses risks that may affect the outcome of the project or the quality 
of the product.  
 
 Software  quality  assurance —defines  and conducts  the activities  required  to ensure  software 
quality.  
 
 Technical  reviews —assesses  software  engineering  work products  in an effort  to uncover  and 
remove errors before they are propagated to the next activity.  
 
 Measurement —defines and collects process, project, and product measures that assist the 
team in delivering software that meets stakeholders needs; can be used in conjunction with  all 
other framework and umbrella activities.  
 
 Software configuration management —manages the effects of change throughout the 
software process.  
 
  Reusability management —defines criteria for work product reuse and establishes 
mechanisms to achieve reusable components.  
 
  Work  product  preparation  and production —encompasses  the activities  required  to create 
work products such as models, documents, logs, forms, and lists.  
 
The Software Engineering process is not rigid ---It should be agile and adaptable. Therefore, a 
process adopted for one project might be significantly different than a process adopted for another 
project.  
Among  the differences  are: 
 
 Overall  flow and level  of interdependencies  among  tasks  
 
 Degree  to which  work  tasks  are defined  within  each framework activity  
 
 Degree  to which  work  products  are identified  and required  
 
 Manner  in which  quality  assurance  activities  are applied  
 
 Manner  in which  project  tracking  and control  activities  are applied  
 
 Overall  degree  of detail and  rigor  of process description  
SOFTWARE  ENGINEERING  AND  PROJECT  MANAGEMENT (BCS501)  
 
 
11  
  Degree  to which  stakeholders are  involved  in the project  
 
 Level  of autonomy  given to  project  team 
 
 Degree  to which  team  organization  and roles  are prescribed  
 
1.5 THE  SOFTWARE  ENGINEERING  PRACTICE  
Generic  concepts  and principles  that apply  to framework  activities:  
1.5.1 The Essence  of Practice  
 Understand  the problem  (communication  and analysis)  
 Plan a solution  (software design)  
 Carry  out the plan (code  generation)  
 Examine  the result  for accuracy  (testing  and quality  assurance).  
These  steps  lead to series  of questions:  
 
Understand the Problem  
 Who are  the stakeholders?  
 What  are the Unknowns ? What functions  and features  are required  to solve  the problem?  
 Is it possible  to create  smaller  problems  that are easier  to understand?  
 Can a graphic analysis  model  be created?  
 
Plan the Solution  
 Have you seen similar problems before?  Is there existing software that implements these  
features.  
 Has a similar  problem  been  solved? ‘ 
 Can readily  solvable  sub problems  be defined?  
 Can a design  model  be created?  –Effective  implementation.  
Carry  Out the Plan  
 Does  solution  conform  to the plan?  Is source  code  traceable  to the design model?  
 Is each solution  component  provably,  correct?  Have  design  and code  be reviewed?  
 
Examine  the Result  
 Is it possible  to test each component  part of the solution?  
 Does  the solution  produce  results  that conform  to the data,  functions,  and features 
required?  
SOFTWARE  ENGINEERING  AND  PROJECT  MANAGEMENT (BCS501)  
 
 
12  
 1.5.2 Software  General  Principles  
The dictionary defines the word principle as “an important underlying law or assumption 
required in a system of thought.” David Hooker has Proposed seven principles that focus o n software 
Engineering practice.  
 
The First Principle:  The Reason  It All Exists  
A software  system exists  for one reason: to provide  value to its users.  
 
The Second  Principle:  KISS  (Keep  It Simple,  Stupid!)  
Software design is not a haphazard process. There are many factors to consider in any design 
effort.  All design should be as simple as possible, but no simpler.  
 
The Third Principle:  Maintain the  Vision  
A clear vision is essential to the success of a software project. Without one, a project almost 
unfaili ngly ends up being “of two [or more] minds” about itself.  
 
The Fourth  Principle:  What  You Produce,  Others  Will Consume  
Always specify, design, and implement knowing someone else will have to understand what 
you are doing.  
 
The Fifth  Principle:  Be Open  to the Future A system  with a long lifetime  has more  value.  Never 
design yourself into a corner. Before beginning a software project, be sure the software has a 
business purpose and that users perceive value in it.  
 
The Sixth Principle: Plan Ahead for Reuse Reuse saves time and effort. Planning ahead for reuse 
reduces the cost and increases the value of both the reusable components and the systems  into which 
they are incorporated.  
 
The Seventh principle: Think ! Placing clear, complete thought before action alm ost always 
produces better results. When you think about something, you are more likely to do it right.  
 
1.6 SOFTWARE  MYTHS  
Software Myths - beliefs about software and the process used to build it - can be traced to the earliest 
days of computing. Myths have a number of attributes that have made them insidious. For instance, 
myths appear to be reasonable statements of fact, they have an intuitive feel, and they are often 
promulgated by experienced practitioners who “know the score”.  
 
Management  Myths:  
Managers with software responsibility, like managers in most disciplines, are often under pressure 
to maintain budgets, keep schedules from slipping, and improve quality. Like a drowning person 
who grasps at a straw, a software manager often grasps at belief in a s oftware myth.  
SOFTWARE  ENGINEERING  AND  PROJECT  MANAGEMENT (BCS501)  
 
 
13  
 Myth : We already  have  a book  that’s  full of standards  and procedures  for building  software. 
Won’t that provide my people with everything they need to know?  
Reality : 
 The book of  standards may very well exist, but  is it used?  
 Are software  practitioners  aware  of its existence?  
 Does  it reflect  modern  software  engineering  practice?  
 Is it complete?  
 Is it adaptable?  
 Is it streamlined  to improve  time to delivery  while  still maintaining  a focus  on Quality?  
 
In many  cases,  the answer  to this entire  question  is NO. 
 
Myth : If we get behind schedule,  we can add more  programmers  and catch  up 
 
Reality : Software development is not a mechanistic process like manufacturing. “Adding people  to 
a late software project makes it later.” At first, this statement may seem counterintuitive. However, 
as new people are added, people who were working must spend time educating the newcomers, 
thereby reducing the amount of time spent on productive development effort.  
Peop le can be added  but only in a planned  and well-coordinated  manner.  
 
Myth : If we decide to outsource the software project to a third party, I can just  relax and let that 
firm build it.  
 
Reality : If an organization  does not understand  how to manage  and control  software  project 
internally, it will invariably struggle when it out sources’  software project.  
 
Customer  Myths : 
A customer who requests computer software may be a person at the next desk, a technical group 
down the hall, the marketing /sales depar tment, or an outside company that has requested software 
under contract. In many cases, the customer believes myths about software because software 
managers and practitioners do little to correct misinformation. Myths led to false expectations and 
ultimate ly, dissatisfaction with the developers.  
Myth : A general  statement  of objectives  is sufficient  to begin  writing  programs  - we can fill in 
details later.  
 
Reality : Although  a comprehensive  and stable  statement  of requirements  is not always  possible,  an 
ambiguous statement of objectives is a recipe for disaster. Unambiguous requirements are developed  
only through  effective  and continuous  communication  between  customer  and developer.  
SOFTWARE  ENGINEERING  AND  PROJECT  MANAGEMENT (BCS501)  
 
 
14  
 Myth : Project requirements continually change, but change can be easily accommodated because 
software is flexible . 
Reality : It’s true that software requirement change, but the impact of change varies with the time  at 
which it is introduced. When requirement changes are requested early, cost impact is relatively 
small. However, as time passes, cost impact grows rapidly – resources have been committed, a 
design framework has been established, and change can cause upheaval that requires additional 
resources and major design  modification.  
 
Practitioner's  myths.  
Myths that are still believed by software practitioners have been fostered by 50 years of 
programming culture. During the early days of software, programming was viewed as an art form. 
Old ways and attitudes die hard.  
 
Myth : Once  we write  the program  and get it to work,  our job is done.  
 
Reality : Someone once said that "the sooner you begin 'writing code', the longer it'll take you to get 
done.” Industry data indicate that between 60 and 80 percent of all effort consume d on software will 
be consumed after it is delivered to the customer for the first time.  
 
Myth : Until  I get the program  "running"  I have  no way of assessing  its quality.  
 
Reality : One  of the most effective  software  quality assurance  mechanisms can be  applied from the 
inception of a project —the formal technical review. Software reviews are a "quality filter" that have 
been found to be more effective than testing for finding certain classes of software defects.  
 
Myth : The only deliverable  work  product  for a successful  project  is the working  program.  
 
Reality : A working program is only one part of a software configuration that includes many 
elements. Documentation provides a foundation for successful engineering and, more important, 
guidance for software support.  
 
Myth : Software engineering will make us create voluminous and unnecessary documentation and 
will invariably slow us down.  
Reality : Software engineering is not about creating documents. It is about creating quality. Better 
quality leads to reduced  rework. And reduced rework results in faster delivery times. Many software 
professionals recognize the fallacy of the myths just described. Regrettably, habitual attitudes  and 
methods  foster  poor management  and technical  practices,  even when  reality  dicta tes a better 
approach. Recognition of software realities is the first step toward formulation of practical solutions 
for software engineering.  
SOFTWARE  ENGINEERING  AND  PROJECT  MANAGEMENT (BCS501)  
 
 
15  
 MODULE  1 
CHAPTER  2-- PROCESS  MODELS  
 
2.1 A GENERIC  PROCESS  MODEL  
 
A process was defined as a collection of work activities, actions, and tasks that are performed  when 
some work product is to be created. Each of these activities, actions, and tasks reside within  a 
framework or model that defines their relationship with the  process and with one another.  
The software process is represented schematically in Figure 2.1. Each framework activity is 
populated by a set of software engineering actions. Each software engineering action is defined by 
a task set that identifies the wor k tasks that are to be completed, the work products that will be 
produced, the  quality  assurance  points that will  be required,  and the  milestones that will be  used 
to indicate progress.  
 
 
As I discussed in Chapter 1, a generic process framework for softwa re engineering defines five 
framework activities —communication, planning, modeling, construction, and deployment . In 
addition,  a set of umbrella  activities —project  tracking  and control,  risk management,  quality  
SOFTWARE  ENGINEERING  AND  PROJECT  MANAGEMENT (BCS501)  
 
 
16  
 assurance, configuration management, technical reviews, and others —are applied throughout 
the process.  
 
The important aspect of software process is “Process Flow” which describes how the framework 
activiti es and the actions and tasks that occur within each framework activity are organized with 
respect to sequence and time and is illustrated in Figure 2.2.  
 
 
 
 
A linear  process  [Fig:2.2(a)]  flow executes  each of the five framework  activities  in sequence, 
beginning with communication and culminating with deployment.  
 
An iterative process flow [Fig:2.2(b)] repeats one or more of the activities before proceeding to 
the next.  
 
An evolutionary  process  flow [Fig:2.2(c)]  executes  the activities  in a “circular”  manner.  Each 
circuit through the five activities leads to a more complete version of the software.  
SOFTWARE  ENGINEERING  AND  PROJECT  MANAGEMENT (BCS501)  
 
 
17  
 A parallel process flow [Fig:2.2(d)] executes one or more activities in parallel with other activities 
(e.g. modeling for one aspect of the software might be executed in parallel with construction of 
another aspect of the software).  
 
2.1.1 Defining  a Framework  Activity  
 
There  are five framework  activities,  they are 
o communication,  
o planning,  
o modeling,  
o construction,  and 
o deployment.  
These five framework activities provide a basic definition of Software Process. These Framework 
activities provides basic information like What actions are appropriate for a framework activity, 
given the nature of the problem to be solved, the characteristics of the people doing the work, and 
the stakeholders who are sponsoring the project?  
 
1. Make  contact  with stakeholder  via telephone.  
2. Discuss  requirements  and take notes.  
3. Organize  notes  into a brief  written  statement  of requirements.  
4. E-mail to stakeholder  for review and  approval.  
 
If the project was considerably more complex with many stakeholders, each with a different set of 
requirements, the communication activity might have six distinct actions : inception, elicitation, 
elaboration, negotiati on, specification, and validation. Each of these software engineering actions 
would have many work tasks and a number of distinct work products.  
 
2.1.2 Identifying  a Task  Set 
 Each  software  engineering  action  can be represented  by a number  of different  task sets 
 Each  a collection  of software  engineering  o work tasks,  
o related  work  products,  
o quality  assurance  points,  and 
o project  milestones.  
 Choose a task set that best accommodates the needs of the project and the characteristics  
of software team.  
 This implies that a  software engineering action can be adapted to the specific needs of the 
software project and the characteristics of the project team.  
2.1.3 Process  Patterns  
 
A process pattern describes a process -related problem that is encountered during software 
engineering  work, identifies  the environment  in which  the problem  has been  encountered,  and 
SOFTWARE  ENGINEERING  AND  PROJECT  MANAGEMENT (BCS501)  
 
 
18  
 suggests one or more proven solutions to the problem. Stated in more general terms, a process pattern 
provides you with a template —a consistent method for describing problem solutions within the 
context of the software process.  
 
Patterns can be defined at any level of abstraction. a  pattern might be used to describe a problem 
(and solution) associated with a complete process model (e.g., prototyping). In other situations, 
patterns can be used to describe a problem (and solution) associated with a framework activity (e.g., 
planning) o r an action within a framework activity (e.g., project estimating).  
 
Ambler  has proposed a  template  for describing  a process pattern:  
 
1. Pattern  Name . The pattern  is given  a meaningful  name  describing  it within  the context  of the 
software process ( e.g., Technical Reviews ). 
 
2. Forces . The environment  in which  the pattern  is encountered  and the issues  that make  the 
problem visible and may affect its solution.  
3. Type . The pattern  type is specified.  Ambler  suggests  three  types:  
I. Stage  pattern —Defines  a problem  associated  with a framework  activity  for the process. 
Since  a framework  activity  encompasses  multiple  actions  and work  tasks,  a stage  pattern 
incorporates multiple task patterns that are relevant to the stage (framework activity). 
E.g.: Establishing Commun icatio n. 
This pattern  would  incorporate  the task pattern RequirementsGathering  and others.  
 
II. Task  pattern —Defines  a problem  associated  with a software  engineering  action  or 
work  task and relevant  to successful  software  engineering  practice  (e.g.,  Requirements  
Gathering ). 
 
III. Phase  pattern —Define  the sequence  of framework  activities  that occurs  within  the 
process, even when the overall flow of activities is iterative in nature. E.g: SpiralModel  
or Prototyping . 
 
4. Initial  context . Describes  the conditions  under  which  the pattern  applies.  Prior  to 
the initiation of the pattern:  
(1) What  organizational  or team -related activities  have  already  occurred?  
(2) What  is the entry  state for the process?  
(3) What  software  engineering  information  or project  information  already  exists?  
 
5. Problem . The specific  problem to  be solved  by the pattern.  
 
6. Solution . Describes  how to implement  the pattern  successfully.  It also describes  how 
software engineering information or project information that is available before the initiation  
of the  pattern is transformed as a consequence of the successful execution of the pattern.  
SOFTWARE  ENGINEERING  AND  PROJECT  MANAGEMENT (BCS501)  
 
 
19  
 7. Resulting  Context . Describes  the conditions  that will result  once  the pattern  has been 
successfully implemented. Upon completion of the pattern:  
(1) What  organizational  or team -related activities  must  have  occurred?  
(2) What  is the exit  state for the process?  
(3) What  software engineering information  or project  information  has been developed?  
 
8. Related  Patterns.  Provide  a list of all process  patterns  that are directly  related  to this one. 
This may be represented as a hierarchy or in some other diagrammatic form.  
 
9. Known  Uses  and Examples.  Indicate  the specific  instances  in which  the pattern  is 
applicable.  
 
Conclusion  on Process  patterns  
 Provide  an effective  mechanism  for addressing  problems  associated  with any software 
process.
 The patterns enable you to develop a hierarchical process description that begins at a high 
level of abstraction (a phase pattern). 
 The description  is then  refined  into a  set of stage  patterns  that describe  framework activities
  Once  process  patterns  have  been  developed,  they can be reused  for the definition  of 
process variants. 
 
2.2 PROCESS  ASSESSMENT  AND  IMPROVEMENT  
The existence  of a software  process  is no guarantee  that software  will be delivered  on time,  that 
it will meet the customer’s needs.  
Process  patterns  must be  coupled  with solid  software  engineering  practice.  
Assessment  attempts  to understand  the current  state of the software  process  with the intent  on 
improving it.  
 
A number  of different  approaches  to software  process  assessment  and improvement  have  been 
proposed over the past few decades.  
 
Standard  CMMI  Assessment  Method  for Process  Improvement  (SCAMPI) - Provides  a 
five step process assessmen t model that incorporates five phases: initiating, diagnosing, 
establishing, acting, and learning. The SCAMPI method uses the SEI CMMI as the basis 
for assessment.  
 
CMM -Based Appraisal for Internal Process Improvement (CBA IPI) -Provides a 
diagnostic  techni que for assessing  the relative  maturity  of a software  organization;  uses the 
SEI CMM as the basis for the assessment.  
 
SPICE  (ISO/IEC15504) —a standard  that defines  a set of requirements  for software  process  
SOFTWARE  ENGINEERING  AND  PROJECT  MANAGEMENT (BCS501)  
 
 
20  
 assessment.  The intent  of the standard  is to assist  organizations  in developing  an objective 
evaluation of the efficacy of any defined software process.  
 
ISO 9001:2000 for Software —a generic  standard that applies to any organization that wants 
to improve  the overall  quality  of the products,  systems,  or services  that it provides.  Therefore, 
the standard is directly applicable to software organizations and companies.  
 
 
Elements  of SPI (Software  Process  Improvement)  framework.  
 
 
2.3 PRESCRIPTIVE  PROCESS  MODELS  
Prescriptive process models were originally proposed to bring order to the chaos (disorder) 
of software development.  
 These models have brought a certain amount of useful structure to software engineering  
work and have provided a reasonably effective road m ap for software teams.  
  The edge  of chaos  is defined  as “a natural  state between  order  and chaos,  a grand  
compromise between structure and surprise”.  
 The edge  of chaos  can be visualized  as an unstable,  partially  structured  state.  
 It is unstable  because  it is constantly attracted  to chaos or  to absolute order.  
 The prescriptive  process  approach  in which  order  and project  consistency  are dominant 
issues.  
 “prescriptive”  means  prescribe  a set of process  elements  
o framework  activities,  
o software  engineering  actions , 
o tasks,  
o work  products,  
o quality  assurance, and 
o change  control  mechanisms  for each project.  
SOFTWARE  ENGINEERING  AND  PROJECT  MANAGEMENT (BCS501)  
 
 
21  
  Each process model also prescribes a process flow (also called a work flow) —that is, the 
manner in which the process elements are interrelated to one another.  
  All software process models can accommodate the generic framework activities, but each 
applies  a different  emphasis  to these  activities  and defines  a process  flow that invokes  each 
framework activity in a different manner.  
The Waterfall  Model  
The waterfall model, Fig [2.3] sometimes called the classic life cycle , suggests a  systematic, 
sequential approach to software development that begins with customer specification  of 
requirements and progresses through planning, modeling, construction, and deployment.  
 
 
 
V- model  
A variation in the representation of the waterfall model is called the V-model. represented 
in the following Fig:2.4 . The V -model depicts the relationship of quality assurance actions to the 
actio ns associated with communication, modeling, and early construction activities.  
 
SOFTWARE  ENGINEERING  AND  PROJECT  MANAGEMENT (BCS501)  
 
 
22  
  
As a software team moves down the left side of the V, basic problem requirements are refined 
into progressively more detaile d and technical representations of the problem and its solution. Once 
code has been generated, the team moves up the right side of the V, essentially performing a series 
of tests that validate each of the models created as the team moved down the left side . The V -model 
provides a way of visualizing how verification and validation actions are applied to earlier 
engineering work.  
 
The waterfall  model  is the oldest  paradigm  for software  engineering.  The problems  that are 
sometimes encountered when the waterfal l model is applied are:  
 
1. Real projects  rarely  follow  the sequential  flow that the model  proposes.  Although a  linear 
model can accommodate iteration, it does so indirectly. As a result, changes can cause 
confusion as the project team proceeds.  
 
2. It is often  difficult  for the customer  to state all  requirements  explicitly.  The waterfall model 
requires this and has difficulty accommodating the natural uncertainty that exists at the 
beginning of many projects.  
3.  The customer must have patience. A working version o f the program(s) will not be available 
until late in the project time span.  
 
This model  is suitable  whenever  limited  number  of new development  efforts  and when 
requirements are well defined and reasonably stable.  
 
2.4 INCREMENTAL  PROCESS  MODELS  
The incremental model delivers a series of releases, called increments, that provide 
progressively more functionality for the customer as each increment is delivered.  
 
The incremental model combines elements of linear and parallel process flows. Referring 
to Fig 2.5 The incremental model applies linear sequences in a staggered fashion as calendar time 
progresses. Each linear sequence produces deliverable “increments” of the software in a manner that 
is similar to the increments produced by an evolutionary p rocess flow.  
 
For example, word -processing software developed using the incremental paradigm might 
deliver basic file management, editing, and document production functions in the first increment; 
more sophisticated editing and document production capabili ties in the second increment; spelling 
and grammar checking in the third increment; and advanced page layout capability in the fourth 
increment.  
 
 When an incremental model is used, the first increment is often a core product . That is, 
basic requirements ar e addressed but many extra features remain undelivered. The core 
product  is used by the customer.  As a result  of use and/or  evaluation,  a plan is developed  
SOFTWARE  ENGINEERING  AND  PROJECT  MANAGEMENT (BCS501)  
 
 
23  
 for the next increment.  
 The plan addresses the modification of the core product to better meet the needs of the 
customer and the delivery of additional features and functionality. This process is repeated 
following the delivery of each increment, until the complete product is produced.  
 
 Incremental  development  is particularly  useful  when  staffing  is unavailable  for a complete 
implementation by the business deadline that has been established for the project. Early 
increments can be implemented with fewer people. If the core product is well received,  then 
additional staff (if required) can be added to implement the next increment. In addition, 
increments can be planned to manage technical risks.  
 
 
 
 
 
2.5 EVOLUTIONARY  PROCESS  MODELS  
Evolutionary models are iterative. They are characterized in a manner that enables you to 
develop increasingly more complete versions of the software with each iteration. There are two 
common evolutionary process models.  
 
2.5.1 Prototyping  Model  
Often, a customer defines a set of general objectives for software, but does not identify 
detailed  requirements for  functions  and features.  In other  cases,  the developer  may be  unsure  of the 
SOFTWARE  ENGINEERING  AND  PROJECT  MANAGEMENT (BCS501)  
 
 
24  
 efficiency of an algorithm, the adaptability of an operating system, or the form that human - machine 
interaction should take. In these, and many other situations, a prototyping paradigm may offer the 
best approach.  
 
Although prototyping can be used as a stand -alone process model, it is more commonly used 
as a technique that can be implemented within the conte xt of any one of the process models.  
 
The prototyping paradigm FIG:2.6 begins with communication . You meet with other 
stakeholders to define the overall objectives for the software, identify whatever requirements are 
known, and outline areas where further definition is mandatory. A prototyping iteration is planned 
quickly, and modeling (in the form of a “quick design”) occurs. A quick design focuses on a 
representation of those aspects of the software that will be visible to end users.  
 
The quick design le ads to the construction of a prototype . The prototype is deployed and evaluated 
by stakeholders, who provide feedback that is used to further refine requirements.  
Iteration occurs as the prototype is tuned to satisfy the needs of various stakeholders, whil e at the 
same time enabling you to better understand what needs to be done.  
 
The prototype  serves  as a mechanism  for identifying  software  requirements.  If a working  prototype 
is to be built, you can make use of existing program fragments or apply tools that enable working 
programs to be generated quickly. The prototype can serve as “the first system.”  
 
Prototyping  can be  problematic  for the  following  reasons:  
1. Stakeholders see what appears to be a working version of the software, unaware that the 
prototype is held together randomly, unaware that in the rush to get it working you haven’t 
considered overall software quality or long -term maintainability.  
SOFTWARE  ENGINEERING  AND  PROJECT  MANAGEMENT (BCS501)  
 
 
25  
 2. As a software engineer, you often make implement ation compromises in order to get a 
prototype working quickly. An inappropriate operating system or programming language 
may be used simply because it is available and known; an inefficient algorithm may be 
implemented simply to demonstrate capability.  
 
Although  problems  can occur,  prototyping  can be an effective  paradigm  for software 
engineering.  
 
2.5.2 The Spiral  Model:  
Originally proposed by Barry Boehm, the spiral model is an evolutionary software process 
model that couples the iterative nature of prototyping  with the controlled and systematic aspects  of 
the waterfall  model.  It provides  the potential  for rapid  development  of increasingly  more complete 
versions of the software. Boehm describes the model in the following manner.  
 
The spiral development model is a risk-driven process model generator that is used to guide 
multi -stakeholder concurrent engineering of software intensive systems. It has two main 
distinguishing features. One is a cyclic approach for incrementally growing a system’s degree of 
definition and implementation while decreasing its degree of risk. The other is a set of anchor point 
milestones for ensuring stakeholder commitment to feasible and mutually satisfactory system 
solutions.  
 
Using the spiral model, software is developed in a series of evolutionary releases. During 
early iterations, the release might be a model or prototype. During later iterations, increasingly more 
complete versions of the engineered system are produced.  
 
SOFTWARE  ENGINEERING  AND  PROJECT  MANAGEMENT (BCS501)  
 
 
26  
  
A spiral model is divided into a set of framework activities defined by the software 
engineering team. [Fig:2.7] As this evolutionary process begins, the software team performs 
activities that are implied by a circuit around the spiral in a clockwise direction, begi nning at the 
center.  
Risk is considered as each revolution is made. Anchor point milestones are a combination of 
work products and conditions that are attained along the path of the spiral are noted for each 
evolutionary pass.  
 
The first circuit around the  spiral might result in the development of a product specification; 
subsequent passes around the spiral might be used to develop a prototype and then progressively 
more sophisticated versions of the software. Each pass through the planning region results i n 
adjustments to the project plan.  
 
The spiral model can be adapted to apply throughout the life of the computer software. 
Therefore, the first circuit around the spiral might represent a “concept development project”  
that starts at the core of the spiral and continues for multiple iterations until concept development  
is complete.  The new  product will evolve  through a  number  of iterations around the  spiral. Later, a 
circuit around the spiral might be used to represent a “product enhancement project.”  
The spiral model is a realistic approach to the development of large -scale systems and 
software. Because software evolves as the process progresses, the developer and customer better  
understand  and react  to risks  at each evolutionary  level.  It maintains  the systematic  stepwise 
approach  suggested  by the classic  life cycle  but incorporates  it into an iterative  framework  that 
more realistically reflects the real world.  
 
2.6 CONCURRENT  MODELS  
The concurrent development model sometimes called as concurrent engineering c an be 
represented schematically as a series of framework activities, actions, tasks and their associated 
rules.  
The Fig 2.8 represents  on Software  Engineering  activity  within  the modelling  activity  using  a 
concurrent model approach.  
SOFTWARE  ENGINEERING  AND  PROJECT  MANAGEMENT (BCS501)  
 
 
27  
  
 
 
 
The activity modelling may be in any one of the states noted at any given time, similarly 
other activities, actions or tasks (Communication, Construction) can be represented in analogous 
manner.  
All Software Engineering activities exist concurrently but reside in different states. E.g. Early 
in a project the communication activity has completed its 1st iteration and exists in the awaiting 
changes state.  
The modelling activity (which existed in inactiv e state ) while initial communication was 
completed now make a transition into the under -development state.  
If however, the customer indicates that changes in requirement must be made, the modelling 
activity moves from under -development state to awaiting ch anges state.  
Concurrent modelling defines a series of events that will trigger transitions from state to state 
for each of the software engineering activities, actions or tasks.  
Concurrent  modelling  is applicable  for all types  of software  development  and provides  an 
accurate picture of the current state of the project.  
2.7 SPECIALIZED  PROCESS  MODELS  
2.7.1 Component -Based  Development  
 The component -based development model incorporates many of the characteristics of the 
spiral  model.  It is evolutionary  in nature,  demanding  an iterative  approach  to the creation  of 
SOFTWARE  ENGINEERING  AND  PROJECT  MANAGEMENT (BCS501)  
 
 
28  
 software. However, the component -based development model constructs applications from 
prepackaged software components.  
 
 Modeling  and construction  activitie s begin  with the identification  of candidate  components. 
These components can be designed as either conventional software modules or object - 
oriented classes or packages of classes. Regardless of the technology that is used to create 
the components.  
 
 The component -based  development  model  incorporates  the following steps  
1. Available  component -based  products  are researched  and evaluated  for the application 
domain in question.  
2. Component  integration  issues  are considered.  
3. A software  architecture  is designed  to accommodate  the components.  
4. Components  are integrated  into the  architecture.  
5. Comprehensive  testing  is conducted  to ensure  proper  functionality.  
 The component -based development model leads to software reuse, and reusability provides 
software engineers with a  number of measurable benefits.  
 
2.7.2 The Formal  Methods  Model  
 The formal methods model encompasses a set of activities that leads to formal  mathematical 
specification of computer software.  
 
 Formal methods enable you to specify, develop, and verify a computer -based system by 
applying a rigorous, mathematical notation. A variation on this approach, called  
clean  room software  engineering.  
 
 When formal methods are used during development, they provide a mechanism for 
eliminating  many  of the problems  that are difficult  to overcome  using  other  software 
engineering paradigms.  Ambiguity, incompleteness, and inconsistency can be discovered 
and corrected more easily, but through the application of mathematical analysis.  
 
 When formal methods are used during desig n, they serve as a basis for program  verification 
which discover and correct errors that might otherwise go undetected. The formal methods 
model offers the promise of defect -free software.  
 
Draw  Backs:  
 
• The development  of formal  models  is currently  quite  time consuming  and expensive.  
 
•  Because  few software  developers  have  the necessary  background  to apply  formal 
methods, extensive training is required.  
 
• It is difficult  to use the models  as a communication  mechanism for  Technically  
SOFTWARE  ENGINEERING  AND  PROJECT  MANAGEMENT (BCS501)  
 
 
29  
 unsophisticated  customers.  
 
2.7.3 Aspect -Oriented  Software  Development  
 AOSD defines “aspects” that express customer concerns that cut across multiple system 
functions, features, and information. When concerns cu t across multiple system functions, 
features, and information, they are often referred to as crosscutting concerns. Aspectual 
requirements define those crosscutting concerns that have an impact across the software 
architecture.  
 
 Aspect -oriented software de velopment (AOSD), often referred to as aspect -oriented 
programming (AOP), is a relatively new software engineering paradigm that provides a 
process and methodological approach for defining, specifying, designing, and constructing 
aspects.”  
 
Grundy provides  further discussion of aspects in the context of what he calls aspect - oriented 
component engineering (AOCE):  
 
AOCE uses a concept of horizontal slices through vertically -decomposed software components, 
called “aspects,” to characterize cross -cutting funct ional and non -functional properties of 
components.  
